Never ask a woman her age, a man his
salary, and a developer their operating
system. Because in the year 2050, the
argument might not be as simple as which
Linux DRO do you use? It might just be
what training curriculum did you give to
your operating system? Being hacked may
no longer be from some sort of cool
software edge cases. It'll probably
become something lame like, "Oh, I
gained administrator access by
brainwashing the system to think that I
am its father." No. And that might not
even be a joke because you will need to
raise your own system yourself. On the
other hand, do you guys remember AI
generated Doom? It's like an AI video
generator that generates game footage of
Doom and you get mouse keyboard inputs
to interact with the game footage. So,
it's not running deterministically based
on ones and zeros, but it actually lives
in the neural networks parameters. I had
a video about it. You can check it out
or if you have seen the AI generated
Minecraft is basically the same idea.
But in the current latest form, Genie 3
published by Google, the qualities has
improved. so much that the previous two
examples just look like toy experiments
and it can generate outside the domain
of a specific video game or a world. So
if a system like a game can be simulated
entirely by AI within its parameters,
doesn't that mean a computer system can
also be simulated? Well, if you can
doesn't mean you should. But you know
what would that look like? So in the
latest AI research news, this new paper
called neural computer has shaped the
earliest form of what I described
earlier, which is an AI generated
computer system. And before we take a
good laugh at how absurd this idea is,
we already know how big the AI industry
will be in the coming years, as you can
see from how the stock market is now
slowly pricing in in the mass adoption
of AI. And if you don't want to get left
behind, it is still not too late to
start. Whether you are a student, a
software dev, or just want to pivot into
AI, my latest project, Intuitive
Aiacademy, is the perfect place for you
to dive into the basics of LMS all the
way to the frontier techniques with
everything explained intuitively,
ranging from LM architectures, MOE,
Laura to our latest chapters,
reinforcement learning, where we cover
how RL works and how it interacts with
LMS accompanied with our latest
interactive visualizations to help you
better understand its logic. So for
those who want to get into AI or LMS,
this should be the perfect place for you
to dive into the technical parts without
being intimidated by crazy looking
maths. And right now we are offering a
summer discount. So use the code summer
for 25% off a yearly plan. Anyways, as
bold as its goal sounds, the idea of
what this paper defined as a neural
computer is relatively straightforward.
It's basically a system that unifies
computation, memory, and input and
output in a learned runtime state. So if
you look at AI Doom or Minecraft, they
are basically a miniature version of
systems that requires these three
things, but now being compressed into
the parameters of an AI, more
specifically under an architecture that
is commonly being used to generate AI
videos. But why AI videos? Well, the
general idea of using AI as a simulation
definitely started a long time ago.
According to the renowned researcher
Jorgen Smith Huber, who invented LSTM
and is also the supervisor of this
neural computer paper, he was also the
first one to pioneer the idea of the
world model in the 1990s. Well, whether
if that's true or not is up to the
reader's interpretation, but honestly,
he is a citation machine using Twitter
like an academic journal. Anyways, it
only became a big deal, at least for me,
when OpenAI first introduced Sora with
people realizing that a consequence of
AI video generation being so good is
that they are essentially simulating
physics in both 2D or 3D. Not only that,
it can basically simulate anything,
which I mean anything that can be
visually observed. Like in the next few
years, an AI video generator can
probably generate a video of a person
presenting a PowerPoint slides end to
end, including generating the
PowerPoint's content as it can simulate
the world. But what even is the benefit
of having these world models? Well, a
very creative application of this is how
it's being applied to robotics or
autonomous driving like Whimo to
simulate diverse environments cheaply
and train the autonomous systems on
those environments. But in the case of
simulating games or even an operating
system, it's really hard to imagine the
benefits of it. I mean before we judge
too hard, let's first take a closer look
at how this neural computer works and
what it can do so far. So similar to an
AI video generator, its underlying
architecture is mainly diffusion
transformer which is basically means it
also uses transformers like LLM, but
instead of having the key objective be
next token prediction, it is doing
diffusion. And if you don't know what
diffusion is, the idea is to repeatedly
dn noiseise a noisy image into the
target where the direction of the
denoising process is learned during
training. So you can slowly see a cat
when the model is being conditioned on
the concept of a cat. But instead of
images, it's being done to create
videos. And specifically for this neural
computer setup, the video is not simply
visual output. It is actually the
interface itself as it is trained
exclusively on operating system
recordings. So the model would be
generating the screen of a terminal or a
desktop frame by frame as if it was a
running computer session. And instead of
calling them frames, they call this a
latent runtime state. Because at every
step, the model not only takes in the
current frame, which is what the screen
looks like right now, but also the
user's input like typing, mouse
movement, and clicks. This updates the
internal state, then generates the next
frame. So basically a continuous loop
that updates the hidden state and
renders the next screen. Then if you
want to pull up the terminal and execute
commands through the OS, what the model
does is it has to learn to simulate the
entire interface dynamics inside its own
weights and latent state. In the paper,
they train two different models where
one is basically easier as the model
only needs to learn to simulate a CLI
while the other is the entire OS. For
the CLI, it basically needs to
understand the terminal will be a place
to display the user's input. And when
the user executes the line, it needs to
be able to understand the user's input
command and rules forward to generate
future terminal frames. All of these
already sound extremely hard to achieve.
And in their demo, even though we can't
see how good the input latency is, you
can still see that it is able to write
out the SQL commands pretty well and it
executes some other basic commands. But
if you do look a lot closer, some of
these numbers or letters are pretty
wrong. Like the loading bar versus the
percentage is just very off. Same for
some letters. But if you look at it from
pretty far away, it does look really
believable. As for running the
simulation on the full operating system,
it becomes a much harder problem because
now the model is no longer just dealing
with text laid out in a line. It has to
understand an entire visual environment
where every pixel can change depending
on user actions. So instead of just
predicting the next line in the
terminal, it now has to predict how a
desktop behaves. That includes cursor
movement, clicking buttons, opening
menus, dragging windows, typing into
fields, and all the tiny visual feedback
that comes from it. So if you move your
cursor, it has to move the cursor in the
next frame. If you click something, it
has to trigger the right UI change. If
you open a menu, it has to render the
drop down correctly. But here's where it
gets significantly harder than CLI. In a
terminal, most of the structure is
symbolic and constrained. Text follows
rules. Comments have predictable
outputs, and layout is relatively
simple, and the CLI's window is fixed,
too. But to simulate an operating system
with a guey, everything is much more
continuous and spatial. The terminal
should also work if it was moved to
different places and small mistakes in
positioning, timing or rendering can
completely break the illusion. So, not
only does this increase the difficulty
for the model to learn the causal
relationships between actions, but
monitoring the cursor adds a whole other
level of difficulty. In one of their
experiments, once they explicitly render
the cursor as a visual object and
supervise it at the pixel level,
performance jumps massively up to around
98.7% accuracy from only 8.7% if it was
just simply observed. This is achieved
through cross attention. And the
intuition here is that instead of
forcing the model to blend the action
signal inside the same stream as the
pixels, you give it a separate channel
for actions and then let every part of
the model directly look at the channel
when it needs to. So inside each
transformer layer you now have two
things. The visual tokens which
represent the screen and the action
tokens which represent things like
cursor movement or clicks. So when each
visual token produces a query and
attends over the action tokens as keys
and values. This means that every pixel
region in the image can selectively pull
the relevant action signal. So if the
cursor moved to the top right, the model
would know that only the regions near
that area need care while everything
else can mostly be ignored. This is much
better than just concatenating actions
at the input because the model would
have to carry that information through
many layers and hope it gets used
correctly as cross attention now just
directly injects the signal into the
computation at every layer so the model
can repeatedly align what happened with
what should change on the screen. But
even then it is still far from perfect.
Clicking English on Wikipedia does
create a reaction but it displays words
that are definitely not English.
clicking the color gradients in the
image editing tool, but the color
sliders just go hem because it doesn't
understand how it should act or just in
general not having the correct reaction
when an action is done. There are just
so many more things or interactions for
the model to learn. But conceptually,
what the paper called the complete
neural computer should be able to
replace the operating system program
execution and rendering pipeline using a
learned state update plus a rendering
loop where the latent state will be
handling the memory and the execution
context. The transformer will be the
compute step and the video frames will
be the input and output interface. So
the model itself is the computer, but
from what I've shown you so far, this
obviously does not look that great. It's
only very good at looking at a computer,
somewhat good at reacting like a
computer within like a 5second time
frame, and weak at actually computing
things symbolically or reliably, let
alone having any state persistence. I
highly doubt the context window is even
that long too as the video demos they
have only lasts about 5 seconds. So now
addressing the elephant in the room, why
would anyone need a operating system
that when you open a picture, it might
just give you something else? Because
for a system like this, the most
important thing is probably state
persistence. And to be honest, I don't
know how we'll overcome it because it's
a built-in limitation of AI models. So
unless the transformer in general
overcomes this hurdle, then achieving
what they call a complete neural
computer would be pretty much
impossible. And even if this is
achievable, the way we use this system
will definitely not be the same or as we
expect. For example, installing a
program will no longer be downloading
binaries and executing them on an
operating system. It becomes something
closer to teaching the neural computer a
behavior. Like if you want Photoshop,
you are conditioning the model until it
knows how Photoshop behaves and can
reproduce that interaction loop on
demand. And once it's learned, if you
provide any screenshots of Photoshop, it
can boot up that scene without any
memory usage nor loading, which sounds
really cool, right? But the bigger idea
here is not just faster loading. It's
that the whole notion of software starts
to dissolve. Because in this setup,
you're not launching Photoshop as a
separate process. You are just shifting
the model into a different behavior. The
app is not something external anymore.
It's something that the model has
internalized. So instead of opening a
program, you're essentially conditioning
the next few frames into that program's
dynamics. And that's why the concept of
a program could change because no more
blocks of code sitting on a disk. It
becomes something more like a reusable
capability that can be learned, invoked,
combined, and updated over time. So you
could imagine a future where you don't
install Minecraft. The model just learns
how Minecraft works. And when you want
to play it, you can just load a
screenshot of it and you basically don't
open a file. You basically reconstructs
it from a learned representation. All
can be done under a fixed memory and
compute. And there are also questions
like how does it access the internet?
Would that be another conditional input
just like the cursor? And is it truly
free of memory because the model still
needs a computer system to run on in
order to achieve all these deterministic
behaviors within a non-deterministic
setup. actually just sounds like we're
doing things for the sake of doing
things. And of course, all of this only
works if the system can reliably hold on
to state. If it learns Photoshop but
behaves slightly different every time or
if reopening a project gives you
something inconsistent, then it
completely breaks the illusion of being
in a real system cuz it'll just be
hallucinations. So, right now, we can
probably build extremely good short-term
simulators, but the long-term goal is
more about how to build a system that
can store, reuse, and guarantee behavior
over time. As to why would anyone do
that? Well, I guess when the time's up,
we will know. But this research is
definitely paving the basic definition
and foundation for that because if you
don't define something, then how are you
even going to achieve it? And if that
gap gets solved, then yeah, the way we
use computers would fundamentally
change. And we'll get not just faster
apps or better interfaces, but shift
from executing programs to invoking
learning capabilities, which sounds
pretty fun. And yeah, that's it for this
video. So, if you like today's research
paper review, definitely check out my
newsletter where I cover the latest and
the juiciest papers weekly. On there,
you will be completely up to date every
week on the cool new AI research. So,
you don't have to wait for my videos
because I am always slow at making them.
And thank you guys for watching. A big
shout out to Spam Match, Chris Leoo,
Degan, Robert Zaviasa, Marcelo,
Ferraria, Proof and Enu, DX Research
Group, Alex Midwest Maker, and many
others that support me through Patreon
or YouTube. Follow me on Twitter if you
haven't and I'll see you in the next